To explain the indications/contraindications for, t he 
advantages/disadvantages of, and the risks associat ed with 
intravenous drug therapy. To identify the types of intravascular devices (inc luding 
delivery devices and drivers) that may be used to d eliver 
drugs and fluids. To interpret the effects of varying basic pharmacok inetic 
parameters (e.g. clearance) upon the plasma concent ration 
of IV drugs following bolus, continuous or intermit tent 
infusions. Learning outcomes
Intravenous drug administration. 
MD3001. 
2
Lecture overview
Indications for intravenous therapy Guidelines for the safe administration of intravenous drugs Hazards and complications of intravenous therapy Pharmacokinetics of intravenous drugs 
Indications for intravenous therapy
Reasons for IV administration
Medicine is not available in another form Cannot tolerate medication by another route Constant or high blood level of medicine is needed A rapid onset of effect is needed Some medications are more effective via IV Rarely, to ensure compliance 
Disadvantages of IV administration
Increased cost and time to administer the medicine Requires trained staff to administer (plus location ) 
Rapid onset of actionVolume of fluid needed to dilute the medicine Can cause discomfort/pain to the patient Health risks (e.g. infection) 
When the oral route can be used, it should be used
Safe administration of 
intravenous drugs
Types of intravascular devices (IVDs) 
Peripheral venous catheters Central venous catheters (CVCs) 
–Peripherally inserted CVCs 
–Skin-tunneled CVCs (e.g. Hickman and Broviac lines) 
Arterial catheters 
Syringes, bags, pumps and drivers

Continuous infusion 
–Stable drugs 
–Short half-life 
–Time dependent effects 
–Needs dedicated IV site 
Intermittent infusion 
–Unstable drugs 
–Long half-life 
–Concentration dependent effects 
–Less compatibility concerns Bolus injection 
–Rapid response required 
–Incompatibilities 
–Unstable drugs Methods of administering intravenous medications
Hazards and complications of 
intravenous therapy
Complications of IV drug administration
Fear / Phobia / PainInfection / Sepsis Thrombophlebitis Extravasation / InfiltrationEmboli Anaphylaxis / Hypersensitivity Overdose 

Visual infusion phlebitis score (1-5) 
13 

Red man syndrome
Hypersensitivity reaction due to histamine release 
–erythematous rash of  face, neck, and upper torso 
–diffuse burning, itching, generalised discomfort 
–rare cases: hypotension, angioedema, chest pain, dy spnea 
Vancomycin 
–Treatment of MRSA 
Incidence reduced by 
–Slowing infusion rate 
–More dilute drug solution 
Nallasivan et al , BMJ Case Reports 2009 
Vancomycin

Complications of IV drug administration
Insufficient mixing Stability of medicines in solution
–Light (e.g. total parenteral nutrition [TPN]) 
–Temperature (e.g. insulin, TPN) 
–Concentration (e.g. amiodarone) 
–pH (e.g. midazolam) 
Interaction of medicines with the syringe/bag 

Pharmacokinetics of intravenous 
drugs
Bioavailability
Fraction of unchanged drug that reaches the systemic circulation. IV injection gives 100% bioavailability. 
Infusion vs repeated injections
Plasma drug concentrations
IF drug is infused at a constant rate AND no drug is removed 
from the body, then the graph of plasma concentration 
against time would be a straight line .
Plasma concentration Time 
Plasma drug concentrations
BUT drug is being eliminated from the body as soon as it is 
in the circulation (e.g. via the kidneys). For most drugs, the 
amount of drug eliminated per unit 
time is related to the concentration of drug in the plas ma 
(first-order kinetics): 
–Higher concentrations, more drug is removed per unit o f time. 
–Lower concentrations, less drug is removed per unit of  time. 
THEREFORE the graph of plasma concentration against time 
for most infusions will bend towards a plateau when the 
rate in of drug equals the rate out .
Plasma drug concentration during IV infusion
Plasma concentration increases during infusion unti l rate 
of input equals rate of output 
•“Steady state” 
Clearance
Clearance (CL) is defined as the volume of blood or plasma 
cleared of drug in a unit time – e.g. 10ml/min 
In first order kinetics, whilst amount of drug eliminated per 
unit time varies, CL is a constant: 
Clearance            
Drug eliminated 10ml/min Time zero 1 min 2 min 3 min 
100 ml 
100 mg 
10ml/min 100 ml 
90 mg 
10ml/min 100 ml 
81 mg 
10ml/min 100 ml 
72.9 mg 
10mg 9mg 8.1mg 
Plasma steady state conc. (Css )
t1/2 =ln2 x V d
CL The Css value reached depends on: 
the rate of drug administered ( K0)
volume of plasma cleared of drug per unit time ( CL )
The time taken to reach Css depends on: 
elimination half-life ( t1/2 )
t1/2 directly depends on the volume of distribution ( Vd) and 
inversely on the clearance ( CL ) of drug from the body: 
Half lives and IV administration
Thomson, Paediatric and Perinatal Drug Therapy Volum e 4, Issue 1, 2000 
Clinical impact
What contributes to CL ? (MD3002!) 
What happens if your patient’s CL is lower or 
higher than expected? 
–To the steady state plasma concentration? 
–To the time taken to reach that steady state? 
What happens if you increase or decrease the dose of a drug? 
–To the steady state plasma concentration? 
–To the time taken to reach that steady state? 
Main points
Potential for drug errors is high if careless and many other risks are involved in IV administration
–Guidelines exist for a reason! 
The time taken to reach the 
Css of a drug depends 
on its half life ( t1/2 )
The Css reached depends on the rate of drug in, and 
the rate of clearance of the drug from the plasma 
To explain the indications/contraindications for, t he 
advantages/disadvantages of, and the risks associat ed with 
intravenous drug therapy. To identify the types of intravascular devices (inc luding 
delivery devices and drivers) that may be used to d eliver 
drugs and fluids. To interpret the effects of varying basic pharmacok inetic 
parameters (e.g. clearance) upon the plasma concent ration 
of IV drugs following bolus, continuous or intermit tent 
infusions. Learning outcomes
